---
layout: post
title:  "Swap - From Simple to Subtle"
date:   2020-06-22 19:34:26 -0400
categories: CPP Design
tag: [cpp]
---

## Swap and the standard template library

The swap operation is widely used in the C++ standard library. 

>  All Standard Template Library (STL) **containers** provide swap functionality, and there is a **non-member function template**, `std::swap`.

### Swap and STL containers

Naive implementation of `swap`:

```c++
template <typename T> void swap(T& x, T&y) {
  T tmp(x);
  x = y;
  y = tmp;
}
```

There are some problems with this implementation. 

-  It copies both objects unnecessarily.
- It temporarily allocates resources. This allocation seems unnecessary, given that, in the final state, we have exactly as much data as we started with; only the names we use to access this data have been changed. 
- The last problem is revealed when we consider what happens if the memory allocation we just mentioned fails.

The entire swap operation, which should have been as simple and foolproof as **exchanging the names used to access vector elements**, instead fails with a memory allocation failure. Actually all STL containers, including `std::vector`, provide the guarantee that they can be swapped in constant time. The way this is accomplished is rather straightforward if you consider that **the STL container objects themselves contain only pointers to the data, plus some state**. 

> To swap these containers, we need only to swap the pointers (and the rest of the state, of course) -- the elements of the container remain exactly where they always were,  in dynamically allocated memory, and do not need to be copied or even accessed.

#### Implementation

Since any pointers or other vector data members are not publicly accessible, 1) the swap has to be implemented as a member function of the container, or 2) be declared a friend.

The STL takes the former approach:

> All STL containers have `swap()` member function that swaps the object with another object of the same type.

**Pros**:

- Because only the data members of the containers are swapped, there is no memory allocation.
- Copying pointers and other built-in types cannot throw an exception, and so the entire swap operation does not throw.

**Cons**:

- Containers, like `std::map` are parameterized not just on the element type, but also on a **callable object** of some sort. In order for them to be swappable, callable objects must also be swappable.
- Two swappable containers must necessarily have **allocators** of the same type, but not necessarily the same allocator object.

The requirement that swapping two containers cannot throw an exception, at least as long as the allocators are not involved and the container does not use callable objects or uses non-throwing ones, ends up imposing a rather subtle limitation on the implementation of the container -- it prevents the use of **local buffer optimization**.

**Local Buffer Optimization**

> The idea of local buffer optimization is to avoid dynamic memory allocation for containers of very few elements, such as short strings, by defining a buffer inside the container class itself.

This optimization, however, is generally **incompatible** with the notion of a non-throwing swap, since the elements inside the container object can no longer be exchanged by merely swapping pointers, but have to be copied between the containers. 

### Non-member swap

```c++
template <typename T>
void swap(T& a, T& b);
template <typename T, size_t N>
void swap(T (&a)[N], T (&b)[N]);
```

> This implementation does a swap using a temporary object.

In C++11, `std::swap()` has been redefined to use **move construction** and **move assignment**. 

- If the class is copyable, but does not have move operations declared at all, then the copy constructor and assignment are used. 
- If the class has copy operations declared and move operations declared as **deleted**, there is no automatic fall back to copying -- that class is a non-movable type and `std::swap()` will not compile for it.

Since copying an object can, in general, throw an exception, swapping two objects for which a custom swap behavior is not provided can throw an exception as well. Move operations do not usually throw exceptions, and in C++11, if the object has a move constructor and an assignment operator and neither throw an exception, `std::swap()` also provides the no-throw guarantee.

> This behavior has been formalized in C++17 with a conditional `noexcept()` specifier.

### Swapping like the standard

Concluded guidelines:

- Classes that support swap should implement `swap()` member functions that perform the operation in constant time.
- A free-standing `swap()` non-member function should also be provided for all types that can be swapped.
- Swapping  two objects should not throw exceptions or otherwise fails.

In general, if the type has move operations that do not throw an exception, a non-throwing swap implementation is also possible. Note also that many exception-safety guarantees, and in particular those provided by the standard library, require that move and swap operations do not throw an exception.

## When and why to use swap

The most important application of swap in C++ has to do with writing **exception-safe code**, or, more generally, error-safe code.

> In an exception-safe program, throwing an exception should never leave the program in an undefined state.

In particular, if an operation causes an error, the resources already consumed by the operation in progress should be released.

### Swap and exception safety

```c++
class C; // Our element type
C transmogrify(C x) { return C(...); } // Some operator on C
void transmogrify(const std::vector<C>& in, std::vector<C>& out) {
  out.resize(0);
  out.reserve(in.size());
  for (const auto& x : in) {
    out.push_back(transmogrify(x));
  }
}
```

It is not unreasonable to request that the transmogrify() operation either succeeds and applies the transform to the entire vector, or fails and changes nothing. The key to such exception-safe implementation is the `swap`:

```c++
void transmogrify(const std::vector<C>& in, std::vector<C>& out) {
  std::vector<C> tmp;
  tmp.reserve(in.size());
  for (const auto& x : in) {
    tmp.push_back(transmogrify(x));
  }
  out.swap(tmp); // Must not throw !
}
```

If the output vector has some data in it, both the new data and the old data exist in memory until the end of the function. This is necessary to provide the guarantee that the old data will not be deleted unless the new data can be fully computed.

**Optional Trade-off**

If desired, this guarantee can be traded for lower overall memory use, and the output vector can be emptied at the beginning of the function (on the other hand, any caller who wants to make such a trade-off can just empty the vector before calling `transmogrify()`).

**Copy-and-Swap**

This idiom is sometimes known as **copy-and-swap** and is, perhaps, the easiest way to implement an operation with commit-or-rollback semantics, or the strong exception-safety guarantee.

> The key to the idiom is the ability to swap objects cheaply and without exceptions being thrown.

### Other common swap idioms

Reset a container, or any other swappable object, to its default-constructed state:

```c++
C c = ....;			// Object with stuff in it
{
  C tmp;
  c.swap(tmp);	// c is now empty
}					// Old c is now gone
```

Or even better

```c++
C c = ....;			// Object with stuff in it
C().swap(c);		// Temporary is created and deleted
```

The order of what is swapped with what is very import. The `swap()` member function is called on the temporary object. 

> This is because the `swap()` member function takes its argument by a `C&` non-const reference, and non-const references cannot be bound to temporary objects.

A general form of the idiom for modifying an object is used to apply transforms to the original object without changing its name in the program.

```c++
std::vector<C> vec;
... // Write data into the vector
{
  std::vector<C> tmp;
  transmogrify(vec, tmp); // tmp is the result
  swap(vec, tmp); // Now vec is the result !
}									// and now old vec is destroyed
... // Continue using vec, with new data
```

> With the above swap technique, the program is not polluted with new variable names.

## How to implement and use swap correctly

### Implementing swap

Providing a `swap()` member function is the easiest way to implement swap that needs access to the private data of the class, and  also the only way to swap an object with a temporary object of the same type.

The proper way to declare the `swap()` member function is like this:

```c++
class C {
public:
  void swap(C& rhs) noexcept;
};
```

The `noexcept` specification should only be included if a no-throw guarantee can indeed be given; in some cases, it may need to be conditional, based on properties of other types.

```c++
#include <utility> // <algorithm> before C++11
...
class C {
public:
  void swap(C& rhs) noexcept {
    using std::swap; // Brings in std::swap into this scope
    v_.swap(rhs.v_);
    swap(i_, rhs.i_); // Calls std::swap
  }
  ...
private:
  std::vector<int> v_;
  int i_;
};
```

If you know that your data member has a `swap()` member function, then you can call that. Otherwise, you have to call the non-member swap. This is likely to call an instantiation of the `std::swap()` template, but you should not invoke it by that name.

> Instead, you should bring the name into the containing scope, and call `swap()` without the `std::` qualifier.

**Pimpl Idiom**

A particular implementation idiom that is very swap-friendly is the so-called **pimpl** idiom, also known as the **handle-body** idiom. 

> It is primarily used to **minimize compilation dependencies** and **avoid exposing the implementation** of the class in the header file.

- The entire declaration of a class in the header file consists of all necessary public member functions, plus a single pointer that points to the actual implementation. 
- The implementation and the body of the member functions are all in the `_.cc` file. The *pointer to implementation* data member is often called `p_impl` or `pimpl_`, hence the name of the idiom.

```c++
// In the header C.h:
class C_impl; // Forward declaration
class C {
  public:
  void swap(C& rhs) noexcept {
    swap(pimpl_, rhs.pimpl_);
  }
  void f(...); // Declaration only
  ...
  private:
  C_impl* pimpl_;
};
// In the C file:
class C_impl {
  ... real implementation ...
};
void C::f(...) { pimpl_->f(...); } // Actual implementation of C::f()
```

**non-member swap() function**

- The non-member `swap()` function call will invoke the default implementation of `std::swap()`, if it's visible (for example, due to a `using std::swap` declaration), that is, the one that uses the `copy` or `move` operations.

```c++
class C {
public:
  void swap(C& rhs) noexcept;
};
...
C c1(...), c2(...);
swap(c1, c2); 		// Either does not compile or calls std::swap
```

- And it is evident that we must also support a non-member `swap()` function. We consider what happens if the class is declared not in the global scope, but **in a namespace**.

```c++
namespace N {
class C {
  public:
  void swap(C& rhs) noexcept;
};
void swap(C& lhs, C& rhs) noexcept { lhs.swap(rhs); }
}
...
N::C c1(...), c2(...);
swap(c1, c2); // Calls non-member N::swap()
```

Outside of the N namespace and without a ```using namespace N```; specification, an unqualified call would not normally resolve to a function inside a namespace. However, it does in this case, due to the feature in the standard called the **Argument-Dependent Lookup(ADL)**, also known as the **Koenig lookup**. 

> The ADL adds to the overload resolution all functions declared in the scopes where the arguments of the function are declared. 

If the decision was made to not support a `swap()` member function, then the `swap()` non-member has to have access to the private data of the class. It would have to be declared a friend function:

```c++
class C {
  friend void swap(C& rhs) noexcept;
};
void swap(C& lhs, C& rhs) noexcept {
  ... swap data members of C ...
}
```

It is also possible to define the implementation of the `swap()` function inline, without a separate definition:

```c++
class C {
  friend void swap(C& lhs, C& rhs) noexcept {
    ... swap data members of C ... 
  }
};
```

**self-swap**

> One often forgotten implementation detail is the **self-swap** -- `swap(x, x)`.

A user-defined swap implementation should either be implicitly safe for self-swap or should explicitly test for it. If the swap is implemented in terms of copy or move assignments, it is important to note that the copy assignment is required by the standard to be safe against self-assignment, while the move assignment may change the object, but must leave it in a valid state, called a **moved-from** state (in this state, we can still assign something else to the object).

### Using swap correctly

A key question about using swap correctly is:

> When calling the `swap()` non-member function, should we use the `std::` prefix?

```c++
namespace N {
class C {
  public:
  void swap(C& rhs) noexcept;
};
void swap(C& lhs, C& rhs) noexcept { lhs.swap(rhs); }
}
...
N::C c1(...), c2(...);
std::swap(c1, c2); // Calls std::swap()
swap(c1, c2); // Calls N::swap()
```

- **Note that the Argument-Dependent Lookup does not apply to qualified names**, which is why the call to `std::swap()` still calls the instantiation of the template swap from the `<utility>` header file of the STL. For this reason, 

> It is recommended never to call std::swap() explicitly, but to bring that overload into the current scope with a using declaration, then call the unqualified swap:

```c++
using std::swap;
swap(c1, c2);
```

- Unfortunately, the fully qualified invocation of `std::swap()` is often found in many programs. To protect ourself against such code and to ensure that our custom swap implementation is called no matter what, we can also instantiate the `std::swap()` template for our own type in std namespace.

```c++
namespace std {
  void swap(N::C& lhs, N::C& rhs) noexcept { lhs.swap(rhs); }
}
```

Generally, declaring your own functions or classes for the reserved std:: namespace is not allowed by the standard. 

> However, the standard makes an exception for explicit instantiations of certain template functions (`std::swap()` being among them).

Note that it is not sufficient to instantiate the `std::swap()` template, because such instantiations do not participate in the argument-dependent lookup. If the other non-member swap function is not provided, we have the reverse problem:

```c++
using std::swap;		// Makes std::swap() available
std::swap(c1, c2);		// Calls our std::swap() overload
swap(c1, c2); 			// Calls default std::swap()
```

The non-qualified call ends up calling the instantiation of the default `std::swap()` operation -- the one with the move constructors and assignments.

In order to ensure that every call to swap is correctly handled, both a non-member `swap()` function and the explicit `std::swap()` instantiation should be implemented (of course, they can, and should, all forward to the same implementation).

### Reference

1. [Hands-On Design Patterns with C++](https://www.amazon.com/Hands-Design-Patterns-reusable-maintainable/dp/1788832566#ace-g9766277718), Chapter 4.